# DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF EACH MODULE

## Read_qc module

The MuDoGeR Read_qc module is based on MetaWrap Read_qc module and is responsible to prepare the raw reads for assembly and alignment. The trimming of the raw reads is based on adapted content and PHRED scored with the default setting of Trim-galore. As a result, all the non-high quality sequences are removed. The high quality reads that remained are aligned to the genome of the host with bmtagger leading to removal of host contamination and the read pairs with only one aligned read from the metagenomic data. In the final step, , FASTQC is used to generate quality reports of the raw and final read sets in order to assess read quality improvement. The users have control over which of the above features they wish to use.

## Assembly module
The  MuDoGeR Assembly module is based on MetaWrap Assembly module. This module is utillized for assembling a set of metagenomic reads. The assembly can be achieved by using either MegaHit or metaSPAdes tools. Although, MegaHit is able to assemble large and complex metagenomic data and is cost memory and time-efficient metaSPAdes assembly is usually superior. The MegaHit assembly is sorted by length and their names are changed to resembled the names in the SPAdes, including the contig ID, length, and coverage. In the end the scafgolds with lenght <1000bp are removed and QUAST formates an assembly report.

## Prokaryotic module
The MuDoGeR prokaryotic module is a combination of modules included in the MetaWrap module. The module starts with the binning of the assembly datasets with the use of three wrapped tools (**MaxBin2**, **metaBAT2**, **CONCOCT**). The process results to the production of bin files from each method. The bins are 




## Viral module
The MuDoGeR viral module utilizes three viral recovery tools(**VirFinder**, **VirFinder**, **VIBRANT**) for the identification and recovery of viral genomes from an assemble metagenomic dataset. In the beginning, each of the tools is used to recover independently the viral genomes from a given assembly dataset and locates them in seperate folders.  In the next step the recovered sequences are filtered using bash. The selection of proper VirFinder sequences is based on low q-value (q-value=< 0.01) and high length (length>= 1000 bp), the VirSorter chosen sequences are those classified into categories 1 and 2 and from VIBRANT the selected sequences are contained in the Assembly.phages_combined.fna file. The headers of VirSorter and VIBRANT contigs are modified so they can match with those produced from the VirFinder recovery.It is important to note that in contrast with the other two tools, the VirFinder output recovery file contains only the headers of the assemblies. Because of that,using bash, the headers of the unique filtered sequences from each tool are extracted to a common fasta.file and sorted by length. In the next step, using the headers including in the common fasta.file the actual sequences from the assembly dataset are extracted transfered to a new fasta.file with python. Finally,the duplicated contigs are removed by a de-replication function. The dependencies of the dereplication step are  maximum coverage (-c 70) and maximum identity (-i 95). The values of the dereplication parameters can be changed depending on the users aim and datasets. The final output results, are depositet to a new output folder, contained inside the initial output directory. The dereplication folder contains a fasta file with the dereplicates sequences and a clstr file with the names and the length of each contig. Except from the folder with the dereplication output, the initial output directory contains also the folders with outputs of the initial independent genome recovery of each tool.
